{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2868
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-BoldOblique;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid302\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid701\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid8}
{\list\listtemplateid9\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid801\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid9}
{\list\listtemplateid10\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid901\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid10}
{\list\listtemplateid11\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1001\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid11}
{\list\listtemplateid12\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid12}
{\list\listtemplateid13\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid13}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}{\listoverride\listid9\listoverridecount0\ls9}{\listoverride\listid10\listoverridecount0\ls10}{\listoverride\listid11\listoverridecount0\ls11}{\listoverride\listid12\listoverridecount0\ls12}{\listoverride\listid13\listoverridecount0\ls13}}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12840\viewh8520\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\i\b\fs28 \cf2 \ul \ulc2 Lasagna della nonna Ingrid
\f1\i0 \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf2 \
Every Italian family has its own version of this popular comforting dish - and this one is no exception. Even 
\f3\i king Ferdinand II 
\f2\i0 was said to like it so much that he earned the nickname \'93
\f3\i the Lasagna King!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
The origins of lasagna go back to ancient Rome, where a dish called 
\f3\i laganum
\f2\i0  consisted of a thin layer of wheat dough baked with a meat topping
\f3\i . 
\f2\i0 Its evolution into a tomato-based dish was developed much later in 19th-century Naples. In 1881, recipes resembling modern lasagna began to appear in Neapolitan cuisine. \
\
In the 20th century, the version known as 
\f0\i\b lasagne Verdi alla bolognese
\f2\i0\b0  was formalized by the 
\f3\i Accademia Italiana della Cucina 
\f2\i0 and registered in the 
\f3\i Chamber of Commerce of Felsina (the original Etruscan name of Bologna)
\f2\i0 . For this reason the dish is commonly associated with Bologna rather than Naples, where its earlier forms originated.\
\
The two traditions differ significantly: 
\f3\i Neapolitan lasagna 
\f2\i0 uses white pasta, Neapolitan rag\'f9, meatballs, ricotta, Provola  and Pecorino cheeses, while
\f3\i  Bolognese lasagna 
\f2\i0 uses green pasta, bolognese rag\'f9, b\'e9chamel and Parmigiano Reggiano.\
\
Although my family comes from the south of Italy 
\f3\i (Puglia), 
\f2\i0 my favorite version is the Bolognese one. For practicality, I use white, oven-ready pasta but I also include instructions for homemade pasta if you wish to prepare the quintessential lasagna for a special occasion.\
\
Yield: 6 servings\
Prep Time: 1 hour\
Cook time: 2 \'bd hours\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs36 \cf2 Ingredients\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf2 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b \cf2 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}Meat sauce
\f2\b0 \
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1 large onion, chopped\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1/4 cup finely chopped bacon \
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1 carrot (chopped)\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1 celery stick (chopped)\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}500 g ground meat (half pork/veal, half beef)\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1 cup strong red wine\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1200 g canned crushed tomatoes\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1 tsp dried oregano
\fs36 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\f1\b\fs28 \cf2 \
{\listtext	\'95	}Bechamel\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}6 Tbsp butter (80 g)\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}6 Tbsp all-purpose white flour (60g)\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}3 cups whole milk\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}3 cups beef broth\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1/2 cup grated 
\f3\i Parmigiano Reggiano
\f2\i0 \
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1/2 tsp nutmeg (preferably freshly grated)\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}Salt and pepper to taste\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0\cf2 \
\ls4\ilvl0\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl1
\f1\b \cf2 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Other ingredients\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0
\f2\b0 \cf2 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}700 g mozzarella\
\ls4\ilvl0{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}basil leaves cut into strips\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}3 Tbsp olive oil\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1 cup grated 
\f3\i Parmigiano Reggiano\
\ls5\ilvl0
\f2\i0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1 cup frozen peas (optional)\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls6\ilvl0
\f1\b \cf2 {\listtext	\'95	}Oven-Ready Pasta (*optional: for homemade  pasta read below)\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls7\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}9oz / 255g oven-ready lasagna \
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \

\f1\b * (Optional) Ingredients for homemade pasta\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls8\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}
\f2\b0 500 g all purpose flour \
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}5 whole eggs\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}1 tsp salt\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}5 Tbsp water\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf2 Directions
\f2\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa348\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs30 \cf2 Prepare meat sauce\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls9\ilvl0
\f2\b0\fs28 \cf2 {\listtext	1.	}Cook onion, garlic, carrot, celery and chopped bacon in olive oil until soft and translucent, about 15 minutes.\
{\listtext	2.	}Add ground meat and cook on medium-high heat for about 5-10 minutes, until slightly browned, then add wine and allow  the wine to evaporate for about 3 minutes. Add 2 tsp salt.\
{\listtext	3.	}Add tomatoes and stir well. Cook over medium-low heat, half covered for 1 hour, stirring frequently.\
{\listtext	4.	}Add peas  (optional) and oregano 10 minutes before the end of cooking time.\
{\listtext	5.	}Correct seasoning.\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \

\f1\b *Making home made pasta dough (optional)\
\

\f2\b0 While the meat sauce is cooking you can make the pasta dough.\
\
1.	Place the flour on the counter in a mound and make a well in the center.\
2.	Whisk eggs, add one tsp of salt to the water and pour them into the well, mixing 			everything with a fork.\
3.	Knead for about 10 minutes adding more flour if needed until your dough is elastic and 		smooth.\
4.	Place dough in a container, cover with a cloth and allow it to rest for 30 minutes.\
5.	Make the b\'e9chamel while the dough is resting.\
\pard\tx697\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 6.	If you have a pasta cutting machine roll the dough into very thin sheets and cut 			rectangles approximately 7 x 15 cm. Lay them flat on floured parchment paper. If you 		do not have the machine, work on a floured surface, roll the dough out to the thinnest 		possible thickness and cut the rectangles.\
7.	Proceed as stated in the assembly instructions for homemade pasta below.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa348\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs42 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa348\partightenfactor0

\fs30 \cf2 Prepare b\'e9chamel and set aside\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls10\ilvl0
\f2\b0\fs28 \cf2 {\listtext	1.	}Melt butter on medium heat, add flour and cook for about 5 minutes stirring constantly until lightly golden. \
{\listtext	2.	}Remove from heat and gradually whisk in milk and broth until slightly thickened.\
{\listtext	3.	}Return to heat and cook gently for about 10 minutes, stirring continuously to remove lumps and until slightly thickened. If too thick, add more milk. The resulting bechamel must be fairly loose.\
\ls10\ilvl0{\listtext	4.	}Add nutmeg, \'bd cup Parmesan, salt and pepper.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa348\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs30 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa348\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf2 Assembly with oven ready pasta\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls11\ilvl0
\f2\b0\fs28 \cf2 {\listtext	1.	}1. Preheat oven to 350 F while you assemble the lasagna.\
{\listtext	2.	}2. Spread 1 Tbsp olive oil on bottom and sides of a 30x20 cm lasagna pan.\
{\listtext	3.	}3. Spread a thin layer of bechamel on bottom.\
{\listtext	4.	}4. Build layers in the following sequence: pasta, meat sauce, b\'e9chamel, mozzarella  and \
	 basil strips, Parmesan, and a drizzle of olive oil.\
\ls11\ilvl0{\listtext	6.	}5. Spread bechamel on the last layer of pasta and sprinkle with Parmesan.\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs36 \cf2 Assembly with homemade pasta
\fs28 \
\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf2 1. Add 8 liters of water to a large pot, bring to a rolling boil and add 80g (8Tbsp)  salt.\
2. Drop 4 pasta rectangles at a time, cook for 2-3 minutes, allow them to drain and start building the layers as described in the assembly instructions.
\f1\b\fs36 \
\
Baking\
\

\f2\b0\fs28 1. Bake in the middle of preheated oven for 40 minutes.\
2. Remove from oven, allow to rest for 10 minutes  before serving.\
\
Serve this masterpiece with a good glass of Chianti. Buon appetito!\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls12\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	1.	}\uc0\u8232 \
\ls12\ilvl0
\f1\b\fs36 {\listtext	2.	}Nonna\'92s Wisdom\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls13\ilvl0
\f2\b0\fs28 \cf2 {\listtext	1.	}
\f1\b The B\'e9chamel
\f2\b0 . Cooking the butter and flour for the specified time is important for the mixture to acquire a nutty flavor. To avoid lumps forming, stir the mixture continuously with the wire whisk, while you slowly add the milk-broth mixture. The result must be a generous amount of smooth, liquid bechamel that will allow the pasta to cook thoroughly. \
{\listtext	2.	}
\f1\b The meat sauce.
\f2\b0  Make sure to brown the meat mixture to enhance the flavor of the meat.\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2    3.	 
\f1\b Fresh pasta portions. 
\f2\b0 For every 100 g flour and one egg you obtain 150-160 g pasta 		dough, which is considered the standard dose per person.\
	
\f1\b Cooking the pasta. 
\f2\b0 The golden rule for cooking pasta: for 100g pasta you need 1 L 		boiling water and 10 g salt (remember:100 g pasta / 1 L water / 10 g salt)\
   4.	
\f1\b Timeline.
\f2\b0  You can prepare the meat sauce and the bechamel the day before and 		assemble the lasagna  the same day you are going to bake it. The meat sauce can be 		frozen ahead of time and the bechamel can be kept in the fridge for two or three days.\
	If you decide to prepare the homemade pasta version, I strongly recommend making 		the meat sauce and the b\'e9chamel the day before and assembling the lasagna the 		following day.\
}